\input rotate

\font\title=ptmb at20pt
\font\body=ptmr at12pt
\font\file=pcrr at12pt
\font\cite=ptmro at12pt
\font\price=ptmr at10pt

\baselineskip=13pt
\parskip=13pt
\parindent=0pt

\nopagenumbers

\hyphenpenalty=10000
\exhyphenpenalty=10000

\hsize=7in
\vsize=9.25in

\voffset=-1in
\hoffset=-1in

\hbox to7in{%
  \vbox to9.25in{
    \hsize=6in
    \leftskip=.75in
    \rightskip=.25in

    \vskip1.5in

    \title
    \hfil GNU Emacs\hfil

    \body
    GNU Emacs is the premier text editor and programming environment for
    workstations and high-end PCs.  This manual tells you how to get
    started with Emacs, how to write simple messages as well as complex
    documents, and how to use special modes for editing, compiling, and
    debugging programs.  It also explains how to handle multiple files and
    directories and multiple windows, and how to customize your environment.

    GNU Emacs provides autosave, multiple undos and redos, transparent
    access to remote file systems, multiple backups, support for version
    control systems, and a Lisp interpreter.  In addition, Emacs integrates
    {\file make}, {\file grep}, {\file diff}, and other utilities into a single
    environment.  There are modes for programming in over a dozen different
    languages.  Emacs not only works with plain character terminals but also
    is fully integrated with the X Window System.

    Emacs includes an on-line, easy to follow tutorial and a built-in help
    system that describes all of Emacs's features.

    This is the 9th Edition of the {\cite GNU Emacs Manual}.  It is written
    by Richard M.{} Stallman, who wrote the original Emacs.  This edition
    describes the new features and improvements in version 19, but can also
    be used with the older version 18.

    \vfil

    \leftskip=0pt
    \rightskip=0pt

    \parfillskip=0pt\hfil%
    ISBN 1-882114-03-5

    \vskip.5in
  }%
  \setbox0=\vbox to1in{
    \vfil\hskip.5in
    {\price FSF $\bullet$ US\$25.00 $\bullet$ Printed in USA}
    \vskip.5in
  }%
  \rotl0%
}

\eject\bye
